 
The Playing Rules of Gaelic Football 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Play 
Fair Play Foul Play 
  

      The Play                      Set Play                        Scores                                                                                                       Technical                   Aggressive                    Dissent 
1.                              2.                                 3.                                                                                                                    4.                                  5.                                  6. 


 
 
  
Line Out 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Playing Rules of Gaelic Football 
RULES OF FAIR PLAY RULE 1 - THE PLAY 
 
1.1 The ball is in play once it has been thrown in or kicked after the referee has given a signal to start or restart play, and it remains in play until: (a) the referee signals a stop; 

(b) the ball has passed completely over any boundary line or strikes any flag marking the boundary lines; 

(c) the ball has been prevented from going over any boundary line or is touched in play by anyone other than a player. 




1.2 When the ball is on the ground, it may be played by any part of the body except the hand(s). It may be lifted off the ground with the feet. 



Exceptions: 
(i) The goalkeeper may play the ball on the ground with their hand(s) inside their own small rectangle. 

(ii) Any player who falls or is knocked to the ground while in possession of the ball may fist or palm the ball away on the ground, and may score by so doing. 

(iii) The ball may not be lifted off the ground with the knees. 


 
1.3 When the ball is not on the ground, it may be played by any part of the body. 

1.4 When a player is in possession of the ball, it may be:- (a) carried for a maximum of four consecutive steps or held in the hand(s) for no longer than the time needed to take four steps; 

(b) played from the foot to the hand(s) -toe- tapped; 

(c) bounced once, and once after each toe-tap; 

(d) changed from one hand to the other once, with the original holding hand maintaining contact until the change is completed; 

(e) played away with: (i) a fist 

(ii) an open hand-in which instance there shall be a definite underhand striking action 




(f) released for a kick, a toe-tap or a pass with a fist or an open hand. 






The ball may be knocked from an opponent’s hand(s) by flicking it with the open hand. 
 
1.5 When the ball has not been caught, it may be bounced more than once in succession. 



 
1.6 Player(s) may tackle an opponent for the ball. 



  
 
1.7 Provided the player has at least one foot on the ground, a player may make a shoulder to shoulder charge on an opponent:- (a) who is in possession of the ball, or 

(b) who is playing the ball other than when kicking it, or 

(c) when both players are moving in the direction of the ball to play it. 






When the goalkeeper is within the small rectangle, the goalkeeper may not be charged but the goalkeeper may be challenged for possession of the ball, and the goalkeeper’s kick or pass may be blocked. Incidental contact with the goalkeeper while playing 
the ball is permitted. A goalkeeper may move along their goal-line when a penalty kick is being taken. 
 
1.8 For a run-up to a free kick or kick-out, a player may go outside a boundary line. For a sideline kick, a player shall kick the ball from outside the boundary line. Other than as stated above, players shall remain within the field of play. 



 
1.9 A player may hold up their hands to intercept a free kick. 



 
1.10 The Goalkeeper may only receive the ball from a teammate: (a) Inside the large rectangle when both the goalkeeper and the teammate passing the ball are inside the large rectangle; or 

(b) when the goalkeeper is in the opposition half of the field. 
A gold logo with text

AI-generated content may be incorrect.






 
1.11 The team captain, or a nominated deputy if the captain is the goalkeeper or is no longer on the field, are the only players who may speak to the referee to seek clarification of a decision made by the referee and such clarification may only be sought during a break in play. 



  
 
RULE 2 - SET PLAY 
2.1 The Referee, facing the players, starts the game and re-starts it after half-time, by throwing the ball between one player from each team, in their own defensive sides of the half-way line. A second player from each team shall stand on opposite sidelines at the halfway line. The second players shall swap sidelines for the 2nd half throw-in. All other players shall be in their respective positions behind the 45m lines. 

2.2 After a foul, play is restarted by a free kick or a throw-in (as specified in Rule) where the foul(s) occurred. 



Exceptions: 
(i) In the case of fouls by a defending player within the rectangles, the following shall apply: A penalty kick shall be awarded for an Aggressive Foul within the large rectangle or any foul within the small rectangle. 




The penalty kick shall be taken from the ground at a point 11m from the centre of the goal-line. A free kick from the centre of the 13m line shall be awarded for a Technical Foul by a defending player within the large rectangle but outside the small rectangle. 
(See Rule 5.41) 
(ii) A free kick awarded for a foul by a defending player inside their own 13m line but outside the large rectangle shall be taken from the 13m line opposite where the foul occurred. 

(iii) When a player is fouled immediately after the player plays the ball away and a score results, it shall stand. Otherwise, the referee shall award a free kick from where the foul occurred or, if more advantageous, from where the ball lands or crosses the sideline. With the option of a free being awarded from where the foul occurred being retained, the rule shall apply in the following circumstances as outlined:- (a) If the ball lands over the endline, the free kick shall be given on the 13m line opposite the place where the ball crossed the endline; 

(b) If the ball lands inside the opponents’ 13m line, a free kick shall be given from the 13m at the point where the ball crossed this line. 

(c) The player taking the free may choose to take the free kick from outside the 40m arc though the application of this Rule would otherwise result in a free kick from inside the 40m arc. 




(iv) Where otherwise specified in penalties listed in  




Rule 4 - infractions 14, 15, 16(a) & (b),17, 18, 26, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34 and 36; 
Rule 5 - infractions 4, 41 and 42; 
Rule 6 - infraction 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. 
(v) When play is restarted by throwing in the ball after a foul(s) within 13m of the sideline, the throw-in shall be given 13m from the sideline and directly infield from where the foul(s) occurred. 

(vi) When play is restarted by throwing in the ball after a foul(s) between the endline and the 20m line, the throw-in shall be given on the 20m line opposite where the foul(s) occurred, subject to the provisions stated in (v) above. 




All players except the player taking the free kick shall be at least 13m from where the free kick is awarded, or, all players except those two contesting the throw-in shall be at least 13m from where the throw-in is awarded. 
2.3 When opposing players foul simultaneously, play is restarted by throwing in the ball. 



  
 
2.4 A penalty kick shall be taken from the ground at a point 11m from the centre of the goal- line, and only the defending goalkeeper may stand on the goal-line. All other players, with the exception of the player taking the kick, shall be outside the 20m line and the arc, be at 



least13m from the ball, and shall not cross the 20m line or the arc until the ball has been kicked. The goalkeeper may move along the goalkeeper’s line, but may not advance from the goal-line until the ball has been kicked. If a defending player fouls before the ball is kicked and a goal does not result, the referee shall allow the penalty kick to be retaken. 
(Note: Central Council has interpreted the words “shall allow” to mean that where the referee decides that a defending player(s) has/have fouled before the ball is kicked, the Penalty taker has the option of retaking the Penalty Kick or having a point scored to stand).  
 
 
2.5  (a) A free kick, other than a penalty kick or a 45m free kick as prescribed in Rule 2.8, or a free kick awarded for     a Mark, may be taken from the hands or from the ground or by means of a Solo and Go. A player having indicated their option to the referee shall not be permitted to change that decision. 

(b) The ball shall be stationary when a free kick is taken from the ground. 

(c) Where a Solo and Go is availed of, it must be taken from a position within four metres of where the foul has occurred and must be taken immediately after the free has been awarded and without undue delay unless the referee has stopped play for any purpose such as to allow for attention to be given to an injured player or to deal with a disciplinary issue. The ball must not travel backwards. A player taking a Solo and Go may not be challenged within four metres of the position where the Solo and Go was taken. A Solo and Go may not be taken within the opposition 20m line. Where a Solo and Go is not taken immediately, the free must be taken from the hands or from the ground, at the point where the foul occurred. 







 
2.6 With the Referee’s consent, a free kick may be taken immediately. 
A diagram of a football game

Description automatically generated



Exceptions: 
(i) A penalty kick and a free kick awarded to a team from their opponents’ 13m line. 

(ii) A player taking a Solo and Go does not require the Referee’s consent unless the Referee has stopped play for any purpose such as to allow for attention to be given to an injured player or to deal with a disciplinary issue. 


 
2.7  (a) When the ball is played over the end-line by the Team attacking that end, or after a score is made, play is restarted by a kick-out off the ground from the centre point of the 20m line and shall be kicked forward. If  the goalkeeper is not taking the kick-out, the goalkeeper shall stay in the small rectangle.The player taking the kick-out may play the ball more than once before any other player touches it but may not take the ball into the hands. 







Other players may remain inside the 20 m line and the 40m Arc but shall be at least 13m from the ball until it is kicked. Players may not impede or interfere with the goalkeeper, or another opposition player, taking the kick-out. 
The ball shall travel outside the 40m Arc before being played by another player of the defending team. 
(b) The Player taking the kick-out after the ball goes wide or a score shall have the option of using a standard tee as approved by Central Council. 

(c) A player in direct receipt of their kick-out may not pass the ball to their team’s goalkeeper, or the player taking the kick-out, without another player playing the ball. 





  
 
2.8 A ‘45’ 



When the ball is played over the endline and outside the goalposts by the team defending that end, a free kick off the ground shall be awarded to the opposing team on the 45m line opposite where the ball crossed the endline. 
2.9 When a team plays the ball over the sideline, a free kick from the hand(s) shall be awarded to the opposing team from outside the boundary line from the place where the ball crossed 



the sideline. If opposing players play the ball simultaneously over the sideline, or if the officials are not sure which team played the ball last, the Referee, facing the players, shall throw in the ball between one player from each team 13m from the sideline and directly infield from where the ball crossed the sideline. A ball that strikes a sideline or corner flag shall be treated as having crossed the sideline. All players except the player taking the sideline kick, or the two players contesting the throw-in, shall be at least 13m from the ball until it has been kicked or thrown in. 
2.10 If in exceptional circumstances play is stopped by the Referee to enable a seriously injured player to be treated on the field or removed from the field of play, play shall resume in one of the following manners: 


(a) If a Team is in possession when the play is stopped, the play shall resume with a free kick to that Team from the position at which the play was stopped, unless the play was stopped inside the opponents 13m line in which case the free shall be awarded from the 13m line opposite the point where the play was stopped. A score may not be made directly fromsuch a free. 

(b) If neither Team is in possession when the play is stopped, a throw-in shall be given at 


position where the play was stopped, subject to the provisions stated in Exceptions (v) and (iii) of Rule 2.2 
2.11 If the ball touches any non-player during play, play is restarted by throwing in the ball at 



the place concerned, but if the ball touches any non-player from a free kick, the free kick shall be retaken. 
Exceptions: 
(i) As provided in Rule 3.3 (a). 

(ii) If the ball has been prevented from going over a boundary line by a non-player other than the referee, it shall be treated as having crossed the line, and the referee shall make the appropriate award. 


2.12 Mark 



The referee shall award a Mark, in either of the following circumstances: 
(i) When the player catches the ball cleanly from a kick-out, without it touching the ground, on or past the 45m line nearest the kick-out point (a Kick Out Mark). 




                                                            or 
(ii) When a player catches the ball cleanly on or inside the 20m line from a kick in play or from a kick-out mark, delivered by an attacking player on or beyond the opposing team’s 45m line, and without it touching the ground (an Advanced Mark). 




The following procedures shall apply: 
 
(a) Free Kick 





The player shall signify to the Referee if the player is availing of the free kick by immediately raising an arm upright and that player then taking the kick from the hands. The free kick shall be taken from the point where the Mark is awarded except in the case of a Mark awarded to an attacking team inside a 13m line when the free shall be taken from the point on the 13m line directly in line with where the Mark is awarded. 
 
Once the player indicates the player is taking the ‘Mark’, the Referee shall allow up to fifteen seconds for the player to take the kick. If the player delays longer than fifteen seconds, the Referee shall cancel the ‘Mark’ and throw in the ball between a player from each side. 
Once the player indicates they are taking the ‘Mark, the opposing players must retreat 13m to 
allow the player space to take the kick. If an opposing player deliberately blocks or attempts to block the kick within 13m, or if an opposing player impedes the player while the player is taking the kick, the Referee shall penalise the opposing team by bringing the ball forward 50m, up 
to opponents’ 13m line. 
 
If the Referee determines that the player who makes the Mark has been injured in the process and is unable to take the kick, the Referee shall direct the player’s nearest team-mate to take the kick, but this may only be allowed in exceptional circumstances. 
 
A score may be made from a free awarded for a Mark. 
 
(b) Play on immediately - Kick Out Mark (i) A player who makes a Kick Out Mark may play on immediately and, in this circumstance, the player may not be challenged within four metres of the position from where the Kick Out Mark is made.  

(ii) If the Player is illegally challenged, within four metres of the position from where the Kick Out Mark is made, a free kick shall be awarded 50m more advantageous than the place of the original mark – up to opponent’s 13m line. The player taking the free may choose to take the free kick from outside the 40m arc though the application of this Rule would otherwise result in a free kick from inside the 40m arc. 








 
(c) Play on immediately - Advanced Mark 





A player who makes an Advanced Mark may play on immediately. The Referee may allow the play to continue if the Referee considers that this presents the potential of an advantage to the team of the player awarded the Mark. A player who is permitted to play on may be immediately challenged for the ball. 
 
The Referee shall signal that the Mark has been awarded and that advantage is being allowed 
to accrue by raising an arm upright and shall allow the advantage to run by maintaining that arm in the upright position until it becomes clear that no advantage has accrued.  
 
An advantage has accrued if a point or a goal is scored. 
 
If no advantage has accrued to the team of the player awarded the mark, the referee will indicate that by saying ‘no advantage gained’ and will take the ball back to the point of the Mark. 
 
If a player from the team of the player awarded the Mark commits a technical foul before they have accrued an advantage, the referee will stop play and allow the Mark to be taken from its original position. 
 
If a player from either team commits an aggressive foul before advantage has accrued, the referee will apply the penalty for that subsequent aggressive foul. 
 
Advantage shall not be applied if the referee suspects that a player is seriously injured. The referee shall apply all other relevant disciplinary action even when advantage is being allowed. 
 
2.13 When a Foul is committed, the Referee may allow the play to continue if the Referee considers that this presents the potential of a goal scoring opportunity or another advantage to the 



  team offended. 
 
The Referee shall signal that advantage by raising an arm upright and shall allow the 
advantage to run by maintaining that arm in the upright position until it becomes clear that no advantage has accrued. 
 
 
 
If the referee deems that a clear advantage has accrued to the team offended, the advantage ends and the referee will indicate that by saying “advantage over”, lowering their arm and allowing play to continue as normal. 
 
If the referee deems that no advantage is accruing to the team offended, the referee will indicate that by saying “no advantage gained” and will take the ball back to the point of the infraction. 
 
If a player from the team offended commits a technical foul before they have accrued an advantage, the referee will stop play and apply the penalty for the first infringement. 
 
If a player from the team offended commits an aggressive foul before they have accrued an advantage, the referee will apply the penalty for that subsequent aggressive foul. 
 
If a player from the team which has committed the foul commits another foul when the advantage is ongoing, the free will be awarded from the more favourable position to the team offended of the location of the two fouls. 
 
Advantage shall not be applied if the referee suspects that a player is seriously injured. 
 
The referee shall apply all other relevant disciplinary action even when advantage is being allowed. 
2.14 During play, a team must have at least four players (which may include the goalkeeper) in their half of the field and at least three outfield players in the opposition half of the field. 



Exception: 
A breach of this Rule does not occur where the player(s) who would otherwise cause the breach 
 (a) have do so unintentionally 
 (b) are within 4m of the half way line 
 (c) are not interfering with play 
(d) are not interfering with the opponent, and 
(e) are not gaining an advantage  
  
2.15 Unless stated otherwise, where a Rule requires a player to be inside or outside a particular line on the Field of Play, the player is required to have both feet inside or outside the line, as appropriate. 



  
 
RULE 3 – SCORES 
 
3.1 A goal is scored when the ball is played over the goal-line between the posts and under the crossbar by either team. A point is scored when the ball is played over the crossbar between the posts by either team, inside the 40m arc or inside the 20m line. Two points are scored when the ball is played directly over the crossbar between the posts (whether from a free kick, Solo and Go, or from general play), having been kicked by a player who has at least one foot on or outside the 40m arc and without the ball having been touched by any other player 



 
3.2 A score may be made by striking the ball in flight with the hand(s). 



 
3.3 (a) A score shall be allowed if, in the opinion of the referee, the ball was prevented from crossing the goal-line by anyone other than a player or the referee. (b) If part of the goalposts or crossbar is displaced during play, the referee shall award the score which the referee considers would have resulted had a part not been displaced. 

(c) If an opposing player interferes with the goal posts when the ball is in flight from a free or side-line kick, and a score does not result, the Referee shall order that the free or side-line kick must be retaken. 

(d) A score shall be allowed if, in the opinion of the Referee, a score was prevented by an opposing player interfering with the goal posts during the Play other than as provided in (c) above. 






 
3.4 If a defending player plays the ball through their own scoring space in any manner, this shall count as a score. 



 
3.5 A Score may not be made directly from a free-kick awarded under Rule 2.10 (i) (a) 



Rules of Foul Play 
RULE 4 - TECHNICAL FOULS 
4.1 To overcarry or overhold the ball. 

4.2 (a) To throw the ball. (b) To handpass the ball without: (i) It being Fisted 









or 
(ii) It being struck with an open hand with a definite underhand striking action. 



4.3 To lift the ball off the ground with the knees. 

4.4 To lie on the ball. 

4.5 To touch the ball on the ground with the hand(s), except as provided in Rule 1.2. 

4.6 To bounce the ball more than once consecutively after catching it. 

4.7 To play the ball up with the hand(s) and catch it again before it touches the ground, another player, or goal-posts. 

4.8 To wrest the ball from an opponent who has caught the ball. 

4.9 For an attacking player to enter opponents’ small rectangle: 


(a) During Play (excluding Set Play), before the final play of the ball into the small rectangle. 

(b) In Set Play, before the ball enters the small rectangle. 


Exceptions: 
(i) If an attacking player legally enters the small rectangle, and the ball is played from that 



area but is returned before the attacking player has time to leave the area, provided the player does not play the ball or interfere with the defence, a foul is not committed. 
(ii) When a point is scored from outside the small rectangle and the ball is sufficiently high 



to be out of reach of all players, the score shall be allowed even though an attacking player may have been otherwise illegally within the small rectangle before the ball - provided that the player in question does not interfere with the defence. 
4.10 (a) To change the ball from one hand to the other, without the original holding hand maintaining contact until the change is completed. (b) To change the ball from one hand to the other more than once, unless the ball is bounced or toe-tapped between the changes. 




4.11 (a) For a player on the team awarded a free kick or a sideline kick to be less than 13m from the 



ball before it is kicked, except where the free kick is being taken immediately, with the Referee’s consent, or by means of a Solo and Go. 
(b) For a player on the team awarded a penalty kick to be inside the 20m line or the 20m arc before the ball is kicked. 


4.12 For a player attacking a goal to carry the ball over opponents’ goal-line. 



 
4.13 For a player attacking a goal who is in possession of the ball to score a goal with the player’s hand(s) except as provided in Rule 1.2 Exception (ii). 



Penalty for the above - Free kick from where the foul occurred except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 
 
4.14 When within own small rectangle to be less than 13m from the ball for opponents’ free kick. 



Penalty - Penalty kick. 
4.15 (a) For a player on the team defending a penalty kick, with the exception of the goalkeeper, to be inside the 20m line or the 20m arc before the kick is taken. (b) For the goalkeeper defending a penalty kick to move nearer than 11m before the kick is taken. 






Penalty - If a goal is not scored, the referee shall allow the penalty kick to be retaken.  
(Note: See Central Council interpretation of “shall allow” after Rule 2.4.) 
4.16 (a) For an opposing player to be less than 13m from the ball before a free kick or a sideline kick is taken, except where the free kick is being taken immediately, with the Referee’s consent, or by means of a Solo and Go. 



Penalty - Free kick 13m more advantageous than place of original kick - up to opponents’ 13m line. 
(b) In the case of a free kick awarded for a Mark: 




For an opposing Player not retreating 13m to allow space for the kick to be taken, to deliberately block or attempt to block the kick within 13m, or to impede the free taker when the player is taking the kick. 
Penalty - Free kick 50m more advantageous than place of original free kick up to the opponents 13m line. 
(c) In the case of a Player awarded a Kick-Out Mark opting to play on immediately:  




For the Player to be illegally challenged, within four metres of the position from where the Kick-Out Mark is made. 
Penalty -  Free Kick 50m more advantageous than the place of the original Mark – up to the opponents 13m line.  The player taking the free may choose to take the free kick from outside the 40m arc though the application of this Rule would otherwise result in a free kick from inside the 40m arc.  
4.17 To delay an opponent taking a free kick or sideline kick by: 


(a) Hitting or kicking the ball away; or not “handing over” the ball (i.e. giving the ball directly to the nearest opposition player, or the player fouled, in a prompt and respectful manner). 

(b) Not releasing the ball to the opposition, or 

(c) Deliberately not moving back to allow a quick free or Solo and Go to be taken. 4.18 To interfere with a player taking a freekick, sideline kick or kickout by jumping up and down, waving hands, or any other physical or verbal interference considered by the referee to be aimed at distracting the player taking the kick. 





Exception - A player holding their hands upright shall not constitute an interference. 
Penalty for the above fouls - Free kick 50m in the direction of the goal posts to a more advantageous position than the original kick – up to opponents’ 13m line. However, the opponents of the team conceding the foul may take a free kick from outside the 40m arc though the application of this Rule would otherwise result in a free kick from inside the 40m arc. 
4.19 For a player to be less than 13m from the ball, before a kick-out. 



Penalty - a free kick from where the foul occurred. 
4.20 To reset the ball for a kick-out/free kick/ penalty from the ground, without the referee’s permission, after the whistle has been blown for the kick-out/free kick/penalty, to be taken from the ground. touched it, unless the ball rebounds off the goal-posts/crossbar. 

4.21 To play the ball again after taking a free kick/ penalty/sideline kick before another player has touched it, unless the ball rebounds off the goal-posts/crossbar. 

4.22 To make a divot for the purpose of teeing up the ball for a free kick or kick-out. 

4.23 (a) To advance the ball deliberately from the place at which a free kick or sideline kick is to be taken. 



(b) To take a sideline kick from a position not outside the boundary line. 
4.24 To waste time by delaying the taking of a free kick or sideline kick awarded to own team. 



Penalty for the above foul - 
(i) Cancel free kick or sideline kick. 

(ii) Throw in the ball where the foul occurred except as provided under Exceptions (v) and 


(vi) of Rule 2.2. 
4.25 To use a kicking tee illegally. 



Penalty for the above foul - 
(i) Disallow any resultant score 

(ii) Throw in the ball where the foul occurred except as provided under Exceptions (v) and 


(vi) of Rule 2.2. 
4.26 For a player taking a kick-out to take the ball into the hand(s) before another player has played it. 



Penalty for the above foul - 
(i) Cancel kick-out. 

(ii) Free kick on defenders’ 13m line in front of scoring space. 


 
4.27 For another player on the team taking a kick-out to play the ball before it has travelled outside the 40m arc. 



Penalty - A free kick from where the foul occurred. 
4.28 To waste time by delaying own kick-out. 

4.29 To take the kick-out after a wide or after a score other than from the centre point of the 20m line 



or 
Not to kick the ball forward. 
Penalty for the above fouls - 
(i) Cancel kick-out. 

(ii) Free kick on defenders’ 13m line in front of scoring space. 4.30 A player in direct receipt of a kick-out may not pass the ball to their team’s goalkeeper or other player who took the kick-out without another player playing the ball. 





Penalty for the above foul - 
A free kick from the position the goalkeeper or other player who took the kick-out receives the pass, or if the goalkeeper or other player who took the kick-out is inside the 13m line (whether the player is inside the small rectangle or not) when in receipt of the pass, the free shall be from the 13m line opposite where the foul occurred. 
  
 
4.31 For a player(s) from each team to foul simultaneously. 



Penalty - Throw in the ball where the fouls occurred except as provided in Exceptions (v) and (vi) of Rule 2.2. 
 
4.32 To deliberately go outside the boundary lines to gain an advantage except as provided in Rule 1.9. 



 
Penalty - Free kick from where the foul occurred. 
 
4.33 To interfere with goalposts to distract opponents or to gain an advantage. 



 
Penalties 
(i) Caution offender, order off for second cautionable offence. 

(ii) If an opposing player interferes with the goal posts when the ball is in flight from a free or side-line kick, and a score does not result, the Referee shall order that the free or side-line kick must be retaken. 

(iii) A score shall be allowed if, in the opinion of the Referee, a score was prevented by an opposing player interfering with the goal posts during the Play other than as provided in (ii) above. 



4.34 For a goalkeeper to receive the ball by a pass: 


(a) From a teammate, when the goalkeeper is outside the large rectangle and in their own half of the field; 

(b) From a teammate, while the goalkeeper is inside the large rectangle, unless it has been played into the large rectangle by an opposing player. 


Penalty 
A free kick from the position the goalkeeper receives the pass, or if the goalkeeper is inside the 13m line (whether the player making the pass is inside the small rectangle or not) when in receipt of the pass, the free will be from the 13m line opposite where the foul occurred. 
4.35 To commit a breach of Rule 2.14 (Set Play) in the act of carrying, receiving or intercepting the ball, or attempting to do so. 



Penalty 
Free kick from the place where the player crossed the half-way line. 
4.36 To commit a breach of Rule 2.14 (Set Play) other than in the circumstances outlined in Rule 4.35. 



Penalty 
Free kick from the centre point of the offending team’s 20m line. However, the opponents of the team conceding the foul may take a free kick from any point outside the 40m arc. 
4.37 To challenge a player taking a Solo and Go (immediately after the free has been awarded) within four metres of the position from where the Solo and Go is taken. 



Penalty 
Free kick 50m more advantageous than the place of the original kick – up to opponents’ 13m line. The player taking the free may choose to take the free kick from outside the 40m arc though the application of this Rule would otherwise result in a free kick from inside the 40m arc. 
4.38 For a player to take a Solo and Go having indicated to the referee that they were going to take a free kick. 



Penalty 
Free kick from where the Solo and Go was taken. 
4.39 For a player to play a ball backwards from a Solo and Go. 



Penalty 
Free kick from where the Solo and Go was taken.
RULE 5 - AGGRESSIVE FOULS 
Category 1 Infractions 
Definition of a Category I Infraction - Being ordered off on foot of either a second Cautionable Infraction or a Cautionable Infraction followed by a Cynical Behaviour Infraction (In Football). 
Category 1 – Related Infractions 
5.1 To block or attempt to block with the boot when an opponent is kicking the ball from the hand(s). 

5.2 To prevent or attempt to prevent an opponent from lifting or kicking the ball off the ground by striking an opponent’s hand, arm, foot or leg with the boot. 

5.3 To engage in any other form of rough play. 



 
Penalty for the above fouls – 
(i) Caution offender; order off for second cautionable foul 

(ii) Free kick from where foul occurred except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 




 
5.4 To attempt to achieve an advantage by feigning a foul or injury. 



Penalty for the above fouls - 
(i) Caution offender; order off for second cautionable foul. 

(ii) If play has been stopped for a foul, a free kick from where play was stopped, except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 




 
5.5 To hold an opponent with the hand(s). 

5.6 To use the fist on or around the body of an opponent for the purpose of dispossessing that opponent of the ball. 

5.7 (a) To charge an opponent in the back or to the front. 


(b) To charge an opponent : (i) who is not in possession of the ball, or 

(ii) is in the act of kicking the ball, or 

(iii) If both players are not moving in the direction of the ball to play it. 




(c) To charge an opponent for the purpose of giving an advantage to a team-mate. 


 
Penalty for the above fouls- 
(i) Free kick from where the foul occurred except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 

(ii) Caution offender for committing any of the above fouls a second time. Order off for a further repetition or for other cautionable foul. 



 
5.8 To push an opponent with the hand(s). 



  
 
 
5.9 (a) To charge ( in a manner otherwise permissible on an opponent ) the Goalkeeper in the goalkeeper’s small rectangle. 


(b) For a player in possession of the ball to charge an opponent. 


 
Penalty for the above fouls - 
(i) Free kick from where foul occurred, except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 

(ii) Caution offender for persistently committing such fouls. Order off for further repetition or for other Cautionable Foul 



 
Category II Infractions – Cynical Behaviour 
5.10 To deliberately pull down an opponent. 

5.11 To deliberately trip an opponent with hand(s), arm, leg or foot. 

5.12  To deliberately collide with an opponent after that opponent has played the ball away or for the purpose of taking that opponent out of the movement of play. 

5.13 To deliberately prevent or restrict, or to attempt to prevent or restrict, an opponent from moving or from playing the ball, by holding up an opponent. 

5.14 To contribute to a melee by being the third or subsequent player into a melee except where that player enters the melee and solely engages in the removal of a team-mate. 

5.15 To remonstrate in an aggressive manner with a Match Official.. 

5.16 To threaten or to use abusive or provocative language or gestures to an opponent or team- mate. 



 
Penalty for the above fouls - 
(i) Order the offender off for ten minutes in the Sin Bin by showing the offender a Black Card. Exception: If the offender has previously in the game received a Yellow Card for committing a Cautionable Infraction, the offender shall be shown a Black Card, followed by a Red Card, and ordered off for the remainder of the game, including any Extra-Time when played. 

(ii) If on resuming play after serving ten minutes in the Sin Bin, a player commits a further Cynical Behaviour Infraction (Black Card) or a Cautionable Infraction (Yellow Card) that player shall be shown a Black or Yellow Card, as appropriate, followed by a Red Card, and ordered off for the remainder of the game, including any Extra-Time when played. 

(iii) Applicable to 5.10 - 5.15. Free kick from where the foul occurred except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 

(iv) Applicable to 5.16 only. 




Where an opponent is involved – Free kick from where the foul occurred except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. Where a team-mate is involved - Throw in the ball where the foul occurred except as provided under Exceptions (v) and (vi) of Rule 2.2. 
 
Category III Infractions 
5.17 To strike or to attempt to strike an opponent with arm, elbow, hand or knee with minimal force. 

5.18 To kick or attempt to kick an opponent, with minimal force. 

5.19 To behave in any way which is dangerous to an opponent. 

5.20 To spit at an opponent. 

5.21 To interfere with an Opposing Team Official by minor physical interference e.g. laying a hand on, pushing, pulling or jostling, on or off the Field of Play. 



Penalty for the above fouls - 
(i) Order offender off. 

(ii) Free kick from where foul occurred, except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 




  
 
5.22 To commit any of the fouls listed in 5.17 to 5.20 (inclusive) against a team-mate. 



 Penalty for the above fouls - 
(i) Order offender off. 

(ii) Throw in the ball where the foul occurred, except as provided under Exceptions (v) and 




 (vi) of Rule 2.2. 
Category IV Infractions 
5.23 To strike or to attempt to strike an opponent by arm, elbow, hand, or knee with force or causing injury. 

5.24 To strike or attempt to strike an opponent with the head. 

5.25 To kick an opponent either with force or causing injury. 

5.26 To attempt to kick an opponent with force. 

5.27 To stamp on an opponent. 

5.28    To inflict an injury recklessly on an opponent by means other than those stated above.    

5.29 To use abusive language to a Referee, Score Umpire, Line Umpire or Sideline Official. 

5.30 To assault an opposing Team Official. 



Penalty for the above fouls – 
(i) Order offender off 
(ii)  Free kick from where foul occurred, except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 
5.31 To commit any of the fouls listed in 5.23 to 5.28 (inclusive) against a team-mate.  



Penalty for the above fouls –  
(i)  Order offender off. 
(ii) Throw in the ball where the foul occurred, except as provided under Exceptions  
(v) and (vi) or Rule 2.2. 
 
Category V Infractions 
5.32  To interfere with a Referee, Score Umpire, Line Umpire or Sideline Official – minor physical interference e.g. laying a hand on, pushing, pulling or jostling. 

5.33 To use threatening language to a Referee, Score Umpire, Line Umpire or Sideline Official. 

5.34 To use threatening or abusive conduct towards a Referee, Score Umpire, Line Umpire or Sideline Official . 



Penalty for the above fouls – 
(i) Order offender off. 

(ii) Free kick from where foul occurred except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 




 
Category VI Infractions 
5.35 To act by deed, word or gesture of a racist, sectarian or anti-inclusion / diversity nature against an opponent or match official. 



 
Penalty for the above fouls – 
(i) Order offender off. 




(iI) Free kick from where foul occurred, except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 
 
Category VII Infractions 
5.36 To strike or attempt to strike, or any type of assault on, a Referee, Score Umpire, Line Umpire or Sideline Official. 



 
Penalty for the above fouls – 
(i) Order offender off. 

(ii) Free kick from where foul occurred, except as provided under Exceptions of Rule 2.2. 




 
Other Provisions 
5.37 (a) To commit outside of Playing Time any of the fouls listed in Rules 5.17 to 5.20 or 5.23 to 



5.27 on an opponent on the field from prior to the start of a game until its conclusion on the day. 
(b) To commit outside of Playing Time any of the fouls listed in Rules 5.32 to 5.36 on a Referee, Score Umpire, Line Umpire or Sideline Official from prior to the start of a game until its conclusion on the day. 
 
Penalty for the above fouls: 
Offender shall be treated as ordered off and shall not participate or further participate in the game. If the offender, at the time of the infraction, is one of the 15 players (or less) of the actual team notified to the Referee on a List/Note or Substitution/ Temporary Substitution slip, the player may not be substituted. 
 
5.38 For a player to retaliate between the award of a free to the player’s team and the free kick being taken. 



 
Penalty - 
(i) Cancel free kick. 

(ii) Throw in the ball where the original foul occurred, except as provided under Exceptions (v) and (vi) of Rule 2.2. 

(iii) Apply any other relevant penalty of Rule 5. 




 
5.39 For a player(s) from each team to foul simultaneously. 



 
Penalty for the above fouls - 
(i) Throw in the ball where the fouls occurred, except as provided under Exceptions (v) and (vi) of Rule 2.2. 

(ii) Apply any other relevant penalty of Rule 5. 




 
5.40 When an Aggressive Foul is drawn to the Referee’s attention by a Score Umpire, Line Umpire or Sideline Official, the Referee may apply the appropriate penalty as per Rule 5, and shall restart play as per Rule 2. 



 
5.41 This Rule applies only to Inter-County Senior,Under 20 , Minor (Under 17) and Junior Competitions/Games. 



Notwithstanding provisions of existing Playing Rules 2.2 Exception (i), 2.13 and 5, if one of the following infractions: 
(a) To deliberately pull down an opponent (5.10) or 

(b) To deliberately prevent or restrict, or to attempt to prevent or restrict, an opponent from moving or from playing the ball, by holding up an opponent. (5.13) or 

(c) To deliberately trip an opponent with hand(s), arm, leg or foot (5.11) or 

(d) To deliberately collide with an opponent after the opponent has played the ball away or for the purpose of taking the opponent out of the movement of play (5.12) 


is committed on an attacking player who, or in the case of a Rule 5.12 Infraction the    player’s team, is denied of a goal-scoring opportunity, as defined in Important Terms and Definitions 9, the following penalties shall apply: 
(i) A Penalty Kick shall be awarded to the team affected. 

(ii) The offender shall be issued with a Black Card and be sent to the Sin Bin for ten minutes. 



 
5.42 Notwithstanding any other provision in these Rules, where a foul is committed for the purpose of delaying play, the penalty shall, (in addition to being cautioned or ordered off, where appropriate) be a free kick 50m more advantageous than the position where the foul occurred – up to the opponent’s 13m line. However, the opponents of the team conceding the foul may 


(a) Take a free kick from the place where the foul occurred 

(b) Take a Solo and Go, immediately, from that position 

(c) Take a free kick from outside the 40m arc though the application of this Rule would otherwise result in a free kick from inside the 40m arc 


The referee shall signal this penalty by extending either arm sidewards. 
 
For Information Purposes only – 
Suspensions for the above Infractions are governed by Rule 7.2 – Infractions, Official Guide Part 1. As a guide, the Suspensions are, in part, outlined below. 
Category I 
Being ordered off on foot of infractions that follow the issuing of two Yellow or Black Cards of any sequence or combination. 
Penalties: 
(i) Fixed Penalty: Debarment from playing for the remainder of the game to include any extra time. 

(ii) Fixed Penalty on a second Repeat Infraction (i.e. a third ordering-off) - A One Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next game in the Competition in which the third ordering-off occurred, even if that game occurs in the following year. 




Exception to (ii) above: 
This Penalty shall not apply to Infractions committed in the National Leagues or the Inter-County Senior Championships for which alternative Provisions and Penalties apply as follow: 
In Football, as outlined in Category II, Penalty (3) below. 
In Hurling, Fixed Penalty for the accumulation of three orderings off for Infractions that follow the issuing of two Yellow or Black Cards of any sequence or combination committed in the same year in the National Hurling League, the Inter-County Hurling Championship or in a combination of both Competitions: 
A One Match Suspension applicable to the next game in the combination of the National Hurling League/Inter-County Senior Hurling Championship, even if that game occurs in the following year. 
The Penalty of serving a ten-minute period in the Sin-Bin for a breach of Playing Rule 
5.45 shall not count as an ‘ordering off’ under this provision of Rule. 
Category II – Being ordered off for a Cynical Behaviour Infraction 
Penalties: 
(i) Fixed Penalty for first Infraction - the offender shall serve ten minutes in the Sin Bin. 


Exception: 
If the offender has previously in the game received a Yellow Card for committing a Cautionable Infraction, the offender shall be debarred from playing for the remainder of the game, including any Extra-Time when played. 
(ii) Fixed Penalty - If on resuming play after serving ten minutes in the Sin Bin, a player commits a further Cynical Behaviour or a Cautionable Infraction, the player shall be debarred from playing for the remainder of the game, including any Extra-Time when played. 


  
 
(iii) Fixed Penalty for the accumulation of three ordering-offs for Cynical Behaviour Rule 


5.41 or Second Cautionable infractions committed in the same year in the National Football League, the Inter-County Senior Football Championship or in a combination of both Competitions: 
A One Match Suspension applicable to the next game in the combination of the National Football League/Inter-County Senior Football Championship, even if that game occurs in the following year. 
The Penalty of serving the ten minutes in the Sin Bin shall not count as an “ordering off’ under this provision of Rule. 
Category III 
Penalties: 
(i) Minimum - A One Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next game in the same Competition, even if that game occurs in the following year. 

(ii) Minimum on Repeat Infraction - A Two Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next games in the Competition in which the Repeat Infraction occurred, even if one or both games occur(s) in the following year. 


Exceptions: 
In cases arising from the National Leagues, the Inter-County Senior Championships or a combination of both Competitions in the same code and in the same year, the above Penalties shall be substituted by: 
(i) Minimum: A One Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to 


the next Game in the National League or Inter County Senior Championship, even if that game occurs in the following year. 
(ii) Minimum on Repeat Infraction: A Two Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next Games in the National League or Inter-County Senior Championship, even if one or both games occur(s) in the following year. 


Category IV 
Penalties: 
(i) Minimum - A Two Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next games in the same Competition, even if one or both games occur(s) in the following year. 

(ii) Minimum on Repeat Infraction - A Three Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next games in the same Competition in which the Repeat Infraction occurred, even if one or more of the games occur(s) in the following year. 


Exceptions: 
In cases arising from the National Leagues, the Inter-County Senior Championships or a combination of both Competitions in the same code and in the same year, the above Penalties shall be substituted by: 
(i) Minimum - A Two Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next Games in the National League or Inter-County Senior Championship even if one or both games occur(s) in the following year. 

(ii) Minimum on Repeat Infraction - A Three Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next Games in the National League or Inter-County Senior Championship, even if one or more of the games occur(s) in the following year. 


  
 
Category V 
Penalties: 
(i) Minimum: 12 weeks Suspension in all Codes and at all Levels together with a Two-Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next games in the same Competition, even if one or both games occur(s) in the following year’s competition; 


 
(ii) Minimum on Repeat Infraction: 24 weeks Suspension in all Codes and at all Levels together with a Three-Match Suspension in the same Code and at the same Level, applicable to the next games in the same Competition, even if one or more of the games occur(s) in the following year’s competition.   


Category VI 
Penalties: 
(i) Penalties: Minimum: 48 weeks Suspension in all Codes and at all Levels, with offender’s Team liable to Disqualification, where appropriate. 

(ii) Repeat Infraction within 96 weeks: 96 weeks Suspension in all Codes and at all Levels with offender’s Team liable to Disqualification, where appropriate. 


Category VII: 
Penalties 
(i) Penalties: Minimum: 96 weeks Suspension in all Codes and at all Levels, with offender’s Team liable to Disqualification, where appropriate. 

(ii) Repeat Infraction within 192 weeks: 192 weeks Suspension in all Codes and at all Levels with offender’s Team liable to Disqualification, where appropriate. 


(See Rule 7.3 (q) Official Guide Part 1). 
  
 
RULE 6 - DISSENT 
 
6.1 To challenge the authority of a Referee, Score Umpire, Line Umpire or Sideline Official. 



Penalty - Caution the offender; order off for second cautionable foul. 
6.2 To fail to comply with a Referee’s instruction to use a mouth guard. 



Penalty - Caution the offender; order off if the offender persists. 
6.3 To refuse to leave the field of play, on the instruction of the Referee, for attention, after an injury involving bleeding. 



Penalty - Caution the offender; order off if the offender continues to refuse. 
6.4 To show dissent with the Referee’s decision to award a free to the opposing team. 



Penalty - The free kick already awarded shall be taken from a place 50m more advantageous than the place of original kick – up to opponents’ 13m line. The player taking the free may choose to take the free kick from outside the 40m arc though the application of this Rule would otherwise result in a free kick from inside the 40m arc. Further dissent on an occasion shall be considered as a breach of Rule 6.1 and shall be penalised accordingly. 
Additional penalty at Under 18 or younger grades - Order the offender off for ten minutes in the Sin Bin by showing the offender a Black Card. The offending player can be replaced immediately by a Temporary Substitute for the duration of the ten minutes. In these circumstances, the following acts shall not count as substitutions under Rule 2.3 (i) and (ii), Rules of Specification: 
(1) The use of the Temporary Substitute for a player instructed to leave the field. 

(2) The return to the field of play of the player who was ordered off as a direct replacement for the Temporary Substitute. 

(3) The return to the field of play of the player who was ordered off as a replacement for any other player if the Temporary Substitute has previously been sent off or substituted. 


6.5 (a) To refuse to leave the field of play when ordered off. 



(b) To rejoin the game after being ordered off. 
Procedure 
First give a three-minute warning to the team captain, or the official in charge of the team, or the player(s) involved, and then, if the player(s) refuses to comply, terminate the game. 
6.6 A team or player(s) leaving the field without the Referee’s permission or refusing to continue playing. 



Procedure - As in Rule 6.4 
Any player willing to continue shall give their name to the Referee.  
6.7 For a Team Official to commit any one of the following Misconduct at Games by Team Officials infractions contrary to Rule 5, Rules of Control:   



 (a)  Category Ia.2   To challenge the authority of a Referee, Score Umpire,  
      Line Umpire of Sideline Official; 
 (b) Category Ia.3   To threaten or to use abusive or provocative language or  
     gestures to an opposing player or team official; 
 (c)  Category IIa.1   To use abusive language to a Referee, Score Umpire,  
     Line Umpire or Sideline Official; 
 (d) Category IVa.1   Minor physical interference with (e.g. laying a hand on,  
 pushing, pulling or jostling), threatening or abusive conduct towards, or threatening language to, a Referee, Score Umpire, Line Umpire or Sideline Official; 
 (e) Category Va   Any type of assault on a Referee, Score Umpire, Line  
      Umpire or Sideline Official. 
  
 Additional Penalty on the day to those prescribed for the above Infractions in other Rules: 
 A free kick on the offending team’s 20m line at the centre of the scoring space or, at the option of the free taker, a free kick from the apex of the 40m arc. Where the latter option is availed of, two points shall be awarded for a score from such a free kick where the ball crosses the crossbar between the posts. 
 
6.8 For a player who is not the team captain, or a nominated deputy to speak to the referee to seek clarification of a decision made by the referee or for such request for clarification to be made other than during a break in play. 



Penalty - A free kick from a place 50m more advantageous than the position where the foul occurred – up to the opponent’s 13m line. The player taking the free may choose to take the free kick from outside the 40m arc though the application of this Rule would otherwise result in a free kick from inside the 40m arc. 
IMPORTANT TERMS AND DEFINITIONS - FOOTBALL AND HURLING 
 
The following list of Definitions of Terms used in the Playing Rules forms an integral part of these rules. 
 
1. BOUNCE For a player who has caught the ball to play the ball against the ground with the hand(s) and to catch it on return to the hand(s) again. 


 
2. CARDS Yellow Card – The Card shown to a player for a Cautionable Infraction Black Card – The Card shown to a player for a Cynical Behaviour Infraction (Football) or a breach of Rules 5.45 (Hurling)/5.41 (Football) 


Red Card – The Card shown to a player who is ordered off for the remainder of the game including any Extra Time. 
 
3. CATCH To gain control of the ball with the hand(s) in a way which prevents it falling to the ground. 


 
4. CAUTION To take a player’s name and show that player a yellow card. 


 
5. CHARGE Provided the player has at least one foot on the ground, a player may 


(Fair)  make a shoulder-to- shoulder charge on an opponent (a) who is in possession of the ball, or (b) In Hurling - who is playing the ball; In Football - who is playing the ball other than when kicking it, or (c) both players are moving in the direction of the ball to play it. 
 
6. DELAY Deliberately taking too much time to retrieve the ball, or to (Deliberate) restart play, or any action which unduly delays the restart of play. 


 
7. DIVOT An elevation formed from the surface of the pitch for the purpose of teeing up the ball on the ground. 

8. FOUL 


 Aggressive: To physically or verbally abuse any player or official. 
 Dissent: To disagree openly with any official about any decision. 
 Technical: To ‘foul’ the ball, or any other foul that is not aggressive or dissenting. 
 
9. GOAL-SCORING In the context of Rules 5.45 (Hurling)/5.41 (Football) A situation requiring OPPORTUNITY each of the following (Denial of) criteria: 

(i) The attacking player fouled, as specified in these Rules, shall 


be in possession of the ball, except in the case of Rule 5.12 (Football). Possession shall include a player being in control of the ball as specified in any one or more Rule 1-The Play sub-sections 1.3,1.4,1.7 (Hurling); 
1.4,1.5 (Football). 
(ii) The location of the infraction shall be either: (a) Inside the 20-metre line, but not within 25 metres infield of each sideline or 

(b) Within the semi-circular Arc. 





In the opinion of the Referee, the player fouled or, in the case of a Rule 
5.12 Infraction, the player’s team, had and was denied of the opportunity to score a goal when the infraction was committed. 
 
 
 
10. HANDPASS (a) Football 


When in possession, the ball may be played away with: 
(i) a fist or 

(ii) an open hand - in which instance there shall be a definite underhand striking action. 


The striking hand shall not be in contact with the ball before delivering the strike. 
When both hands are involved, the ball may be struck off a holding hand by the other hand or released from the holding hand and struck with the other hand. 
When one hand is involved, the ball may be released from the holding hand and struck with the same hand. 
The releasing of the ball, when used, is considered an integral part of the fisted/open Handpass. 
 
(b) Hurling 
The ball shall be released and struck with a definite striking action of a hand. The releasing of the ball is considered an integral part of the handpass. 
 
11. IN FLIGHT The ball is deemed to be in flight, once it is off the ground, having been played away within the Rules of Fair Play. 


 
12. LIFT To use the foot or feet to raise the ball from the ground to the hand(s). 


 
13. MARK To catch the ball cleanly from a Kick-Out without it touching (Free  


 Kick) the ground, on or past the 45m line nearest the Kick-Out point. 
                                                or 
To catch the ball cleanly on or inside the 20m line from a kick in play or from  
a Kick-Out, delivered by an attacking player on or beyond the opposing team’s  
45m line and without it touching the ground. 
 
14. OUTFIELD PLAYER    Any player other than the goalkeeper 


 
15. OVERCARRY To take more than four steps while holding the ball in the hand(s). 


 
16. OVERHOLD To hold the ball longer than is required to take four steps. 


 
17. Pass (Football) A player may pass the ball by means of 

(i) A Kick 

(ii) A Handpass 

(iii) Directing the ball to a team-mate by striking it with the hand(s) or any other part of the body. 


 
18. PLAY THE BALL To touch the ball. The last player touching the ball before it crosses a boundary line shall be considered the last person playing it. 


 
19. ‘PULL’ To swing the hurley to play or attempt to play the ball. (FAIR) 


 
20. SIN BIN An area outside the Field of Play designated for players who are ordered off for 10 minutes. 


 
21. SOLO AND GO To take a free kick, immediately, by executing a Toe-Tap and playing on. (Football only) 


 
22. TACKLE Hurling: Any attempt to dispossess or reduce the advantage of opponent within the Rules of Fair Play. With the exception of the charge (fair), the tackle is aimed at the ball not the player. 


 
Football: The tackle is a skill by which one or more players may dispossess an opponent or frustrate the opponent’s objective within the Rules of Fair Play. A tackle is aimed at the ball, not the player.  
A tackler may use the body to confront the opponent but deliberate bodily contact such as punching, slapping, arm holding, pushing, tripping, jersey pulling or a full frontal charge is forbidden. The only deliberate physical contact allowed is that in the course of a Fair Charge one player only with at least one foot on the ground , makes a shoulder to shoulder charge on the player in possession. 
 
23. THROW When the ball, held in the hand(s), is played away without a definite striking action. 


 
24. THROW-IN To throw the ball up over the heads of one player from each team (Football), or to throw the ball along the ground between one player from each team (Hurling). For the start of the game and the restart after half-time, the throw-in shall be between two players from each team. 


 
25. TOE-TAP To release the ball from the hand(s) to the foot and kick it back into the hand(s). 


 
26. WREST To attempt to dispossess an opponent who already has a (firm) hold on the ball, by grabbing the ball to take it from the opponent. 


 
. 
 
 
 
 


